It's Time to Set a New Standard for Sex Education

Please accept our privacy termsYou can change or revoke your preferences at any time by clicking on “Privacy Settings” in the footer at the bottom of the page.The total number of vendors we work with is 25.We believe that trustworthy health information should be free to everyone and we rely on advertising to make that possible. Providing authoritative experiences that are reviewed by physicians and other health and wellness professionals is expensive, but it’s an invaluable service. We collect and securely process your personal data to deliver a relevant experience and support our business, so we ask that you allow cookies in order to access all of our content and features.We and our partners process your personal data in the following ways:store and/or access information on a deviceuse limited data to select advertisingcreate profiles for personalised advertisinguse profiles to select personalised advertisingcreate profiles to personalise contentuse profiles to select personalised contentmeasure advertising performancemeasure content performanceunderstand audiences through statistics or combinations of data from different sourcesdevelop and improve servicesuse limited data to select contentWe collect the following categories of personal data:Identifiers, such as name, email address, physical address, telephone number, IP address.Internet, electronic network, and device activity and device information and related identifiers, such as information about your interactions with the Services, device and advertising identifiers, information about your device hardware and software (as more fully described in the section above, “Information We Collect”).Geolocation data, such as your general location inferred from an IP address.Legally protected classification information, such as gender and marital status.Inferences from some of the above information to create a profile reflecting, for example, your preferences.Sensitive personal information, such as information concerning your health (e.g. health condition), race and ethnicity, preferred pronouns, sex life, or sexual orientation, and login information allowing access to a user account.Other information that directly or indirectly identifies you, such as date of birth, account preferences, and information on any publicly available social media profile of yours through which you use the Services.Your personal data use applies only while using Healthline Media Websites and Apps. Some of our partners do not ask for your consent to process your data and rely on their legitimate business interest. You can modify your setting or object by clicking on “Manage Settings.”At this time, we cannot provide the full site experience if you disallow any purposes, features, or partners. Instead, we will provide a version of our site that shows 10 of our most popular articles without ads, cookies, or tracking technologies.MANAGE SETTINGSHealth ConditionsAllBreast CancerCancer CareCaregiving for Alzheimer's DiseaseChronic Kidney DiseaseChronic Obstructive Pulmonary Disease (COPD)Digestive HealthEye HealthHeart HealthMenopauseMental HealthMigraineMultiple Sclerosis (MS)PsoriasisRheumatoid Arthritis (RA)Sleep HealthType 2 DiabetesWeight ManagementCondition SpotlightAllControlling Ulcerative ColitisNavigating Life with Bipolar DisorderMastering Geographic AtrophyManaging Type 2 DiabetesWellness TopicsAllCBDFitnessHearingMental Well-BeingNutritionParenthoodRecipesSexual HealthSkin CareSleep HealthVitamins and SupplementsWomen's WellnessProduct ReviewsAllAt-Home TestingMen's HealthMental HealthNutritionSleepVitamins and SupplementsWomen's HealthFeatured ProgramsAllYour Eczema Skin Care RoadmapInflammation and AgingCold &amp; Flu Season Survival GuideShe’s Good for RealFeaturedVideo SeriesPill IdentifierFindCareDrugs A-ZLessonsAllCrohn’s and Ulcerative Colitis EssentialsDiabetes NutritionHigh CholesterolTaming Inflammation in PsoriasisTaming Inflammation in Psoriatic ArthritisNewslettersAllAnxiety and DepressionDigestive HealthHeart HealthMigraineNutrition EditionType 2 DiabetesWellness WireLifestyle QuizzesFind a DietFind Healthy SnacksWeight ManagementHow Well Do You Sleep?Are You a Workaholic?Health NewsAllCan 6-6-6 Walking Workout Help You Lose Weight?This Couple Lost 118 Pounds Together Without Medication5 Science-Backed Ways to Live a Longer LifeMorning Coffee May Help You Live Longer‘Weekend Warrior’ Workouts for Your 2025 Fitness GoalsThis Just In5 Tips for a Healthy LifestyleHow to Disinfect Your House After the FluBest Vegan and Plant-Based Meal Delivery for 2025Does Medicare Cover Pneumonia Shots?Chromosomes, Genetics, and Your HealthTop ReadsBest Multivitamins for WomenBest Multivitamins for MenBest Online Therapy ServicesOnline Therapy That Takes InsuranceBuy Ozempic OnlineMounjaro OverviewVideo SeriesYouth in FocusHealthy HarvestThrough an Artist's EyeFuture of HealthFind Your Bezzy CommunityBezzy communities provide meaningful connections with others living with chronic conditions. Join Bezzy on the web or mobile app.AllBreast CancerMultiple SclerosisDepressionMigraineType 2 DiabetesPsoriasisFollow us on social mediaCan't get enough? Connect with us for all things health.PERSPECTIVEThe Problem with Modern Sex Education — and Where We Go from HereWritten by Tess Catlett on December 19, 2023A recent headline from Forbes declares, “90% of American adults feel unprepared by sex education.” Sounds like an exaggeration, right? Unfortunately, research year after year continues to demonstrate this.Share on PinterestIllustration by Maya ChastainAt the time of this writing, 79 pieces of legislation targeting sex education requirements were introduced in 2023.While some sought to improve the current state of sex education for young people, most were designed to further restrict adolescent access to accurate, affirming health information and necessary medical services.Few states agree on what role the school system should play — if any — in the sexual and reproductive development of our nation’s youth.Far fewer seem to understand that this leaves entire generations of people uninformed about how their bodies work, unsure of how to best keep their bodies healthy, and unable to identify unsafe situations or violations of autonomy. Individual states and school districts can set their own curriculumAlthough 38 states and Washington, D.C., require some degree of sex or HIV-focused education, only 18 states require this information to be medically accurate.When sex education is taught, 29 states require the teacher to promote abstinence. 19 states require educators to emphasize the importance of waiting until marriage to engage in sexual activity.Only 10 states and D.C. require inclusive information about sexual orientation, whereas 4 states require teachers to only provide negative information about homosexuality and/or positively emphasize heterosexuality. And at least one state explicitly prohibits instruction on gender identity, gender expression, or sexual orientation. Adolescents ages 15–19 were less likely to report receiving sex education on key topics like birth control in 2015–2019 than they were in 1995, according to a 2022 report from the Guttmacher Institute.Just over half of all adolescents surveyed reported receiving sex education in 2015–2019 that met the minimum standard set by the US Department of Health and Human Services’ Healthy People 2030 initiative.The initiative includesTrusted Source objectives for formal adolescent sex education that focus on delaying sex, using contraception, and preventing HIV and other sexually transmitted infections (STIs). Less than half of all teens surveyed who reported engaging in penis-in-vagina sex received any of the above sex education information before their first time having sex.The effects of inadequate adolescent sex education extend into adulthoodHormonal health company Mira recently surveyed over 1,500 Americans ages 18–44 about their experiences.Respondents overwhelmingly reported feeling unprepared for their first sexual experiences, with male (47%) and female (42%) participants clocking in at similar rates.Participants felt equally unequipped (41%) for communication with sexual partners. When coupled with the lack of information about healthy relationships — 40% of participants said that they didn’t receive any information about consent or respect — the results can be disastrous.And it doesn’t look like folks in other countries are faring any better.LetsStopAIDS, a youth-driven charity raising HIV awareness, surveyed 1,090 Canadians ages 18–24 in May 2023.Although participants felt that their sex education classes provided them with an abundance of scientific information, the majority (63%) were still left feeling unprepared.Young Canadians shared that the curriculum lacked practical knowledge or skills that could be applied in real life.For example, while they did learn about STIs, they didn’t learn about safer sex practices that would help reduce the risk of infection.A staggering 1 in 3 respondents shared that the sex education they received made them feel scared to have sex.Some theorized that their sex education experience was negatively impacted by the instructor’s personal feelings of discomfort or lack of education, resulting in an abstinence-focused class.Similar concerns have also been observed abroad.In the 2021–2022 academic year, researchers surveyedTrusted Source 293 students of the Faculty of Education Sciences at the University of Granada in Spain. Participants ranged in age from 18–49.They found that students overwhelmingly received poor sex education and that respondents believed educators themselves do not receive adequate or standardized sexuality training.The current curriculum doesn’t reflect the diverse needs of today’s learnersA 2018 survey conducted by CalExotics, a pleasure product manufacturer based in California, found that 20% of the 426 adults surveyed have never had a formal sex education class at any point in their lives.The results also revealed that adults across three generations received the same sex education. Respondents ages 18–29 and 45–60 cited abstinence, pregnancy, STIs, and contraception as the primary topics of discussion.Although these are important aspects of sexual and reproductive health, they’re quite limited in scope. In fact, 92% of respondents shared that they have never formally learned about:how to actually have sexlocal sexual health resourcesgender identitysexual orientationsame-sex relationships and sexualityforeplayinterracial relationshipssex toysIn other words, the current standard for sex education curriculum — and that’s assuming sex education occurs at all — hasn’t kept up with our evolving understanding of sex, sexuality, and relationships. More than 70% of adults believe they would benefit from a sex education class at their current age.It’s time to set a new standard for sex educationWe want to be your biggest ally in your pursuit of health and wellness — and that includes your sexual and reproductive health.Consider this your invitation to leave whatever unhelpful or unwelcome messages you’ve received about sex and sexuality at the door.Here at Healthline, we believe people have a right to decide what they do — and don’t do — with their bodies. We encourage you to develop your own understanding of what sex and sexuality mean for your unique body and experience. Ready to get started? Our revamped sexual health hub covers sexual development, physical intimacy, romantic relationships, and more.Something else on your mind? Our new LGBTQIA+ health hub has everything you need to learn more about your relationship with gender, sexuality, and beyond.Tess Catlett is a sex and relationships editor at Healthline, covering all things sticky, scary, and sweet. Find her unpacking her inherited trauma and crying over Harry Styles on Twitter.How we reviewed this article:Healthline has strict sourcing guidelines and relies on peer-reviewed studies, academic research institutions, and medical journals and associations. We only use quality, credible sources to ensure content accuracy and integrity. You can learn more about how we ensure our content is accurate and current by reading our editorial policy.Banerjee D, et al. (2022). Comprehensive sex education—Why should we care? LM, et al. (2020). Pleasure and sex education: The need for broadening both content and measurement.énez-Ríos FJ, et al. (2023). Sex education and comprehensive health education in the future of educational professionals. the proportion of adolescents who get formal sex education before age 18 years — FP‑08. (n.d.). sex lives report: The impact of sex-ed on the sexual behaviour of young Canadians. (2023). LD, et al. (2022). Adolescents' receipt of sex education in a nationally representative sample, 2011-2019. survey: Top 9 real-life ways sex ed keeps failing Americans. (n.d.). and HIV education. (2023). legislation tracker. (2023). Sex ed curriculum lags, adults are left uneducated and misinformed. (2018). importance of access to comprehensive sex education. (2023). adolescents’ receipt of formal sex education [Fact sheet]. (2022).’s the state of sex education in the U.S.? (n.d.). experts continually monitor the health and wellness space, and we update our articles when new information becomes available.Current VersionDec 19, 2023Written ByTess CatlettEdited ByTess CatlettCopy Edited ByNaomi FarrShare this articleWritten by Tess Catlett on December 19, 2023Was this article helpful?YesNoRead this nextHow to Access an Abortion in Each StateWe break down misconceptions, explain what to expect with each type, and share where to best access an abortion wherever you are in the United States.READ MOREWhat Happens If You Vape During Pregnancy?There’s a lot we still don’t know about the effects of vaping on pregnancy and nursing, but current research suggests it should be avoided as much as…READ MOREAlabama Governor Signs Bill Into Law to Protect IVF After Frozen Embryo RulingAlabama Gov. Kay Ivey signed a bill into law that would protect IVF providers from prosecution after the state's Supreme Court ruled that frozen…READ MORESex AddictionMedically reviewed by Timothy J. Legg, PhD, PsyDSex addiction can be a highly dangerous and destructive condition. Like drug or alcohol dependence, it affects a person’s mental health, personal…READ MOREIf You or Your Partner Have a Vulva, It’s Time to Talk About the Kivin MethodMedically reviewed by Jennifer Litner, PhD, LMFT, CSTAttention cunnilingus givers and receivers, we’ve got an oral sex technique to add to your rotation. Behold: the Kivin method.READ MOREUnderstanding the Relationship Between Nicotine and Your Sex DriveMedically reviewed by Alexandra Perez, PharmD, MBA, BCGPMany people report that it does. Let’s look at the current research on nicotine and libido, including what happens when you quit. READ MOREWhat You May Want to Know About Taking CoQ10 and StatinsMedically reviewed by Alexandra Perez, PharmD, MBA, BCGPStatins can lower your body’s level of CoQ10. Learn more about how taking a supplement can affect statin side effects and your overall heart health.READ MORE